[integration] develop/admin documentation about OAuth2 authorization (#5548)
DIRACGrid/DIRAC: docs/source/DeveloperGuide/OAuth2Authorization/index.rst

There are already many articles to familiarize yourself with this framefork, for example `Auth0 Docs <https://auth0.com/docs/authorization/protocols/protocol-oauth2>`_ or `RFCs <https://oauth.net/>`_

.. image:: /_static/Systems/FS/OAuth2/OAuth2Roles.png
   :alt: OAuth 2.0 roles in DIRAC.

OAuth 2.0 roles
===============

An OAuth 2.0 flow has the following `roles <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-1.1>`_:

 - **Resource Owner** - Entity that can grant access to a protected resource. In the context of DIRAC, these are DIRAC users.
 - **Resource Server** - Server hosting the protected resources. In the context of DIRAC, this is DIRAC backend components like a DIRAC services.
 - **Client** - Application requesting access to a protected resource on behalf of the *Resource Owner*. In the context of DIRAC, these are DIRAC client installations.
 - **Authorization Server** - Server that authenticates the *Resource Owner* and issues access tokens after getting proper authorization. In the context of DIRAC, this is DIRAC Authorization Server.

> 

Reviewer: In this schema, where do DIRAC agents fit?

We have DIRAC agents that authenticate themselves using the server certificate of the machine where they are running, while some use a proxy of a user (from the ProxyManager) to authenticate to external services.

Author: When an **Agent** (or **Service**) makes a request to another **Service**, in the _OAuth2_ paradigm, the **Agent** acts as a **Client**, a **Service** accessed by the **Agent** - a **resource server** or a **protected resource**.

If the **Agent** uses a _host certificate_, this is a type of access similar to accessing with _client credentials_ (when _client_id_ and _client_secret_ are passed in requests) and is a request for a **protected resource** on behalf of the **client**. If an **agent** uses a _proxy_ (or user _access token_), it is a request for a **protected resource** on behalf of the **resource owner**.

It looks like I need to add one more diagram showing the interaction between DIRAC components (without direct user involvement).

Reviewer: > It looks like I need to add one more diagram showing the interaction between DIRAC components (without direct user involvement).

Thanks! that would help!

Author: added

  The new `authorization client metadata <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7591#section-2>`_ can be described in the `/DIRAC/Security/Authorization/Clients` section in format::

      CLIENT_NAME
      {
        client_id=MY_CLIENT_ID
        client_secret=MY_CLIENT_SECRET
        scope=supported scopes separated by a space
        response_types=device,
        grant_types=refresh_token,
      }

*Supported scopes*:

  For DIRAC-specific authorization, support for the following scopes is implemented:

    - `g:<DIRAC group name>` this parametric scope allows you to notify which group the user selects when logging in.
    - `proxy` scope informs that the user expects to receive a proxy certificate instead of a token after successful authorization.
    - `lifetime:<proxy life time in a seconds>` scope informs how long the proxy should be.

Commands
========

Two commands were created for interaction with DIRAC AS:

 - :ref:`dirac-login`
 - :ref:`dirac-logout`

Also added the ability to authorize without a certificate while configuring the DIRAC client with the :ref:`dirac-configure` command and a special ``--login`` flag.

Authorization API
=================

> With a new system component - :ref: `APIs <apis>`, was created Authorization API for =Framework= system (see :py:class:`~DIRAC.FrameworkSystem.API.AuthHandler`) which provides the necessary endpoints for interaction with DIRAC AS.

Reviewer: `=Framework=`? I think you meant `*Framework*`. (md vs rst :) )

Author: yes, thanks. Ill fix it

  But you don't have to worry about that, just define the `/DIRAC/Security/Authorization/issuer` option in the DIRAC configuration, and everything else will be determined for you by the :py:meth:`~DIRAC.FrameworkSystem.private.authorization.utils.Utilities.collectMetadata` method.

*Authorization clients*:

  OAuth defines two types of `clients <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-2.1>`_:

   - confidential clients
   - public clients

  DIRAC AS takes both into account and already has a default *public client* (see :py:class:`~DIRAC.FrameworkSystem.private.authorization.utils.Clients`) configured to authorize DIRAC client installations via the device code authorization flow mentioned earlier.
  The new `authorization client metadata <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7591#section-2>`_ can be described in the `/DIRAC/Security/Authorization/Clients` section in format::

      CLIENT_NAME
      {
        client_id=MY_CLIENT_ID
        client_secret=MY_CLIENT_SECRET

>         scope=supported scopes separated by a space

Author: no, the value of this option is scope as it is.  that is, the list is not expected to be returned

Using ``dirac-login my_group --use-diracas --token``:

.. image:: /_static/Systems/FS/OAuth2/diracasTokenFlow.png
   :alt: DIRAC CLI login DIRAC AS flow and obtaining an access token.

User do not need to have a locally installed certificate if logging in through DIRAC AS.

OAuth 2.0 Device flow:
  1) ``dirac-login`` initializes `OAuth 2.0 Device flow` by passing DIRAC client ID to DIRAC AS.
  #) DIRAC AS responds with a ``device_code``, ``user_code``, ``verification_uri``, ``verification_uri_complete``, ``expires_in`` (lifetime in seconds for device_code and user_code), and polling ``interval``.
  #) The command asks the user to log in using a device that has a browser(e.g.: their computer, smartphone) or if the device running ``dirac-login`` has a browser installed, a new tab with the received URL will open automatically.

    a) The command begins polling DIRAC AS for an access token sending requests to token endpoint until either the user completes the browser flow path or the user code expires.

OAuth 2.0 Authorization Code flow:

>   4) After receiving this request from the browser, DIRAC AS will initialize ``OAuth 2.0 Authorization Code`` flow with choosed IdP. If several IdPs are registered in DIRAC and it is not clear from the requested group which one to choose, DIRAC AS will ask the user to choose one.

Reviewer: shouldn't this start with 1)?

Author: I changed the structure a bit to look holistic in one context

    #) DIRAC AS responds with an access and encripted refresh token.

Using ``dirac-login my_group --use-diracas --proxy``:

.. image:: /_static/Systems/FS/OAuth2/diracasProxyFlow.png
   :alt: DIRAC CLI login DIRAC AS flow and obtaining a proxy.

In this case, the process differs only in that when the user successfully completes the browser flow path, DIRAC AS responds with a proxy:
  11) Upon receipt of a request for a proxy, DIRAC AS requests :py:class:`~DIRAC.FrameworkSystem.Service.ProxyManagerHandler.ProxyManagerHandler` to provide a proxy to the requested user and group.

    a) Proxy Manager see if you need a VOMS extension for the selected group.
    #) Proxy Manager makes ``voms-proxy-init`` with the required flags if a VOMS extension is required and add DIRAC group extension.
    #) DIRAC AS responds with a proxy.

Web portal
==========

.. image:: /_static/Systems/FS/OAuth2/WebAppLoginFlow.png
   :alt: DIRAC web login flow.

(docs in progress)

***********
Logging out
***********

Consider process by which an user end work session with DIRAC.

DIRAC CLI
=========

Using ``dirac-logout``:

.. image:: /_static/Systems/FS/OAuth2/revokeToken.png
   :alt: DIRAC logout flow.

> If it is a long session, ie with a refresh token, which allows you to update the access token and thus continue the working session, then to end the session it is necessary to revoke refresh token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it is a long session, i.e. with a refresh token, which allows you to update the access token and thus continue the working session, then to end the session it is necessary to revoke the refresh token:
```

  1) :ref:`dirac-logout` sends a revoke request to DIRAC AS.

    a) DIRAC AS decrypts the refresh token and reads to whom it belongs.
    #) DIRAC AS makes a revoke request to the appropriate IdP.

>     #) DIRAC AS remove record about this refresh token in ``AuthDB`` database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #) DIRAC AS removes the record about this refresh token from the ``AuthDB`` database.
```
